Good day. I'm Norman Wildberger. In
this video, we're going to look at
the arithmetic of natural numbers
from a somewhat new point of view,
with this data structure orientation relying
particularly on the notion of an M-set or
multiset. An interesting feature of this
is that we are really looking at using the
idea of nothing in a novel fashion here, so
there's an opportunity for really rethinking
this fundamental building block or pillar of
mathematics. Arithmetic with natural numbers,
after all, is absolutely fundamental in
setting up so much of modern mathematics.
So, the interesting kind of idea or dichotomy
that I introduced a few videos back is that we
can start off, when we're building up mathematics
right at level zero, by thinking about nothing and
something—these two fundamental orientations:
nothing being a blank page, an empty space,
and something being represented by some kind
of mark, maybe a unit, something relatively
simple that represents to us something. Okay, and
this gives us the beginnings of the new framework
for arithmetic, where we start by defining
a natural number to be an M-set of marks,
the simplest marks, such as, for example, this
thing here. So, we have an M-set—it means we
have square brackets, and inside we have some
marks, and that's what a natural number is. So,
it's very simplistic; it's really capturing
the same kind of orientation that we had in
our very first video, but it's a little bit more
sophisticated because now we're putting things in
the multiset framework. And we can now be more
precise and say that "nat" represents the type
of natural numbers represented this way. So, in
this formulation of things, you have a natural
number precisely when you've gone through the
trouble of writing out an expression like this.
An important distinction between what we're doing
now and the way we started the series is that
now the empty multiset is going to be included
as a possible natural number because if we're
thinking about natural numbers as being M-sets of
marks, then it's possible to have an empty M-set,
and that empty M-set we're going to call zero.
So, that's our distinguished zero object in
our world of natural numbers now. So, that's a
distinction between the way we started the series,
where zero was not included—historically,
zero is not really a natural number—but
with this sort of more modern point of view,
we are including zero in the natural numbers.
So, to summarize, the fundamental
ingredients that we really have here,
okay, in this setting up of natural numbers
are the two concepts of nothing and something,
represented by emptiness—just nothing on the
page—and represented by this mark or this unit,
something which doesn't have to be a
straight line. It could be something else;
it could be a little circle or dot, something
else. But it should be uniform, so they should
all look the same, and it should be something
simple, something kind of fundamental and very
easy to write down. And the other thing that we
need, of course, are brackets—the brackets that
we're using to denote multisets that contain our
bunches of marks so that we know where they end,
so they're bounded, and we have
control over where they actually are.
And so, we have these things called natural
numbers, and here are some examples. So,
there's a natural number, there's a
natural number, there's one, there's one,
there's another one, there's another one,
there's another one, then there's the empty
set natural number—they're all natural numbers.
Now, some of them might be the same—for example,
this one here looks a lot like this
one, and these are the same—but
that's fine. Notice that there's not intrinsically
necessarily an order to them at this point—maybe
a bit of a subtle issue, but we're just saying
what a natural number is. We have not yet gone
to the trouble of organizing them all
in some kind of list or pattern. Okay,
we've just identified what it means for an
expression to be a natural number of type "nat."
And let us compare this view to the 20th-century
view of natural numbers, which was reliant on a
prior set theory and posited that natural numbers
were things that were cooked up from sets of sets,
subsets and such, basically starting with the
empty set. So, for example, the number four was
the set , where 0 was the empty set,
one was the set involving the empty set, two was
the set consisting of 0 as well as one, and three
is the set, well, consisting of 0, 1, and 2. So,
in the 20th century, the view was that the number
4 officially is this thing. Now, our view, which
is a 21st-century point of view—we're moving ahead
here—is that the number 4 is represented by this:
it's a multiset which has these marks in
it. I want you to compare these two things,
all right, and objectively, scientifically,
rationally tell me which one is better,
which one corresponds naturally to the way
people think about natural numbers. Which of
these views do you think supports a more
sensible notion of operations, addition,
multiplication, and proofs, etc.? Okay, so it's
pretty clear what the answer is, of course.
And let's have a look at equality—the idea of
testifying when two expressions that we write down
are actually equal. It's a very important notion,
so we're going to have a look here. Here's
the definition: two natural numbers are equal,
underline that, precisely when we can match up
their entries. What do I mean by that? Well,
here are two natural numbers—there's a natural
number, and there's a natural number—and the claim
here is that these are equal. And what does it
mean to be equal? Well, it means that we can match
up the entries from this one with the entries
from this one. So we'll match these and these,
these ones are going to get matched up, and these
are going to get matched up, and these are going
to get matched up. You can also do that sort of
physically—these are matched up, and then these,
and then these, and then these and the next.
Okay, so it's not really necessary to count them;
we don't have to have a prior notion of counting
to do this, okay? We're just matching them up in
the way that some primitive person might match
up, you know, five fingers with 5 X's on a piece
of bark—just match them up. Here we have a natural
number which is not equal to this natural number,
and the reason is when we try to match
them up—say, match that one with that one,
and match this one with this one, and match this
one with this one—well, then this one here does
not match up with anyone there, and so we can't
match them up, and so these two are not equal.
So, this is meant to be simple, right? This is
meant to be a theory that a primary school student
can understand and appreciate and see, "Yeah,
this is corresponding with something reasonable,
something intuitive, something useful," right? So
now we come to a very important and interesting
development: what happens when we look at the
addition of natural numbers—the simplest and
most fundamental operation in some sense?
Okay, so an interesting thing happens here,
which again is probably going to go outside
your natural intuition and experience—we're
going to look at addition in a different way.
So it's usually considered that addition is
a binary operation; that almost goes without
saying. When we're starting to do arithmetic
in the usual framework, for example, we
say A equals B plus C—we have number B,
we have a number C, we're adding them together to
get another number A. We start with two things,
and we combine them, and we get another
number. But in the M-set framework,
which is something that most modern students
of mathematics are not that familiar with,
in the M-set or multiset framework, we have
more flexibility, right? We can think a little
bit bigger than we can, perhaps, with other
data structures. In particular, the multiset
framework is not ordered naturally, and it's not
constrained by just having one of everything,
right? So we can deal with multiplicities with
M-sets, and we can deal with things not being
ordered—that's the essential orientation. So that
affects us when it comes to defining addition.
So it turns out that in the M-set framework,
having a binary operation is neither necessary
nor desirable. What are we talking about here?
Well, to add natural numbers, what we're going to
do is we're going to form a new M-set containing
all of the entries of the M-sets that we have. I
want to show you this physically, okay? So here
is a box, a blue box, and in this blue box, here
we see a couple of little boxes or containers.
So here's a container—it's got some coins in it,
okay? There's another container, and then here's
another container—got some more coins in it. And
here's a third container containing some
more coins, okay? So these are M-sets;
it's a multiset of coins. There's some repetition,
and they're not ordered. This is another M-set of
coins, and here's another M-set of coins. So
we have a couple of different M-sets of coins,
and now I'm going to add them. I'm going to show
you how to do this physically—I'm probably going
to drop this doing this, but okay. So I'm going
to take this one, and this one, and another one,
okay? And I'm going to add them, but I'm
going to do it in a non-binary fashion,
okay? I want to add them all together. Let's
see if we can do this, okay—three things in no
particular order. Whoops, I just dropped one;
better pick that one up. Okay, there we are,
back on track here. Okay, we have three multisets.
I'm now going to add—ready? Watch carefully,
okay? There's no more left in our containers—we
have dumped everything out, and you can see,
perhaps, that we have all the coins there in this
new multiset. We have added the three multisets
together, but we have not done so in a binary way,
right? We've just dumped them all out—independent
of order, independent of having to do two at once,
right? In principle, we can have, you know, lots
of different containers, and we're just dumping
them all here. We can have, say, three people
doing this—a lot easier. We all sort of dumped
our individual containers into the M-set, we'd be
adding the contents. It's a very interesting,
non-standard view of what addition is.
So, for example, when we're writing stuff down,
okay, here's an M-set of marks, here's an M-set
of marks, here's an M-set of marks. So we
have three natural numbers in this case,
and we're going to add these natural numbers
together. What do we do? We create a new M-set,
which is obtained by copying each one of these
entries into the M-set here. And how we actually
do that, well, it's not prescribed. We can do
that in a number of different ways—this thing
here is essentially unordered. We're writing
it in a kind of an ordered way, but that's not
really essential. So we could take these ones and
sort of go 1, 1, 1, or maybe I should take mark,
mark, mark, and then mark, and then mark, mark,
mark, mark. We're just dumping out the contents
of these three into a new box, conceptually.
I want you to think about having boxes,
having a number of people just dumping into the
containers, and everything dropping into a box.
So this is the arithmetical analog of dumping
the contents of several boxes into a new box.
Now, with this naive, almost physical
understanding of how we add multisets—in this
case, add numbers, natural numbers—we note that
the commutativity and associativity properties of
addition are essentially obvious here, because
we're only dealing with something, a situation
where order is unimportant, and the only objects
that we have—in fact, not a variety of coins—we
just had these unit marks. That's all that ever
appears in our natural numbers—they're always
the same. And the commutativity and associativity
are really obvious notes. If you've got a bunch
of primary school students and you've got them
practicing dumping multisets of coins—like, just
coins of one type, let's say, you know, ten-cent
pieces—so you have a multiset of ten-cent pieces,
each of the kids has a multiset of ten-cent
pieces, and you're, you know, adding all the
M-sets together, they'd have a lot of fun.
They would quickly determine that, you know,
if Jane and Bill combined theirs into a box and
Jane does hers a little bit before Bill and they
look at what they get, and then they do it again
and Bill drops his in a little bit before Jane,
it's not going to make any difference—the
order is not important. If we have three
people and they kind of dump, and one
person gets to dump theirs in first,
it's not going to make any difference to
the collection. I'm sure students are going
to be able to understand that—it's going to be
obvious to them after a while of playing around.
So, you know, in particular, and with our linear
way of writing things, if we have this M-set—mark,
mark—and this M-set—mark, mark, mark—then we
combine them, we get mark, mark, mark, mark, mark.
And that's, of course, the same thing as if we
combine mark, mark, mark with mark, mark, mark in
the usual kind of fashion. Or if we have three of
them, and we combine these guys first, and then we
add that one, well, that's going to be the same as
if we add the first one to the sum of these ones.
So even children can be taught this system,
and they can be taught this before they have
a language—before they actually have been given
names for the numbers. They don't need to know
that this is the number five, this is the number
three, this is the number two—we can just refer
to this as the M-set "mark, mark, mark," and this
is the M-set "mark, mark." Maybe we could use the
word "units"; maybe it's a little bit better
word—"unit, unit, unit." This one is "unit,
unit." Okay, so they could deal with things
at that level, and they could get a sense of
how this number system works, independent of
having actually a naming system for numbers.
So this is a claim that I'm making—it's sort of my
intuition. I haven't actually gone out and taught
kindergarten kids this system, but maybe somebody
could have a go at playing around in this fashion.
And maybe somebody has already done this—maybe
it's a standard kind of educational procedure
for very young people. In any case, there's
something very simple-minded and, I think,
down-to-earth about this very concrete, simple
conceptual framework or approach to arithmetic.
So, especially advantageous is that these basic
properties become essentially obvious facts to
even children who are working with such
a system—that's my direct recommendation.
All right, so now let's look at
multiplication. How are we going to define
multiplication of natural numbers? If we
look at the earlier videos in the series,
you'll see that we've defined
multiplication there in a somewhat
geometrical fashion. Here we are going to
stick with a more arithmetical approach.
So, to multiply natural numbers, we're going
to extend this following multiplication of our
unit marks. So mark times mark equals mark,
or if we prefer, unit times unit equals unit.
We're going to extend that to multiplication of
M-sets of units. So here is an M-set of units,
or a natural number, here's another
M-set of units. To form the product,
we're just going to take all possible products
between the units here and the units there—note
that one times that, that one times that, and so
on—all possible products, and write each one of
those possible products down in its own M-set, so
multiplicities are fine. And then we'll replace
each one of these with what they're equal to,
so we just get a unit repeated, in this case,
six times. So unit, unit times unit, unit,
unit equals unit, unit, unit, unit, unit, unit.
So multiplying M-sets involves multiplying all
possible products of their elements. It's the
same procedure, the same orientation that
we had when we were multiplying axles. So
we might think about this as having a
dramatically simplified multiplication
table—that our new multiplication table for
natural numbers basically just involves this:
there's really only one thing to remember,
that a unit times unit equals unit,
or mark times mark equals mark, or if we prefer,
something times something equals something.
Now, the distributive law is, I think, almost
obvious now, right? Suppose we have what we
call 2 times 4 equals 8, and we have what
we could call 3 times 4 equals 12. Now,
written out with lots of units or marks
instead of the words that we have—well,
if we've gone through all possible
products between these M-sets to get this,
and we've gone through all possible products of
these ones to get this, then if we combine these
two—if we add these two M-sets to get this one—and
multiply it by the same common M-set over here,
right? Then all the possible products that we're
going to get from now multiplying these marks with
these ones—all those possible products are going
to be either of this kind or of this kind. If we
think of this thing here as being composed—say,
those first two are from there and the next ones
are from there—so I think it's pretty clear. If
you got a child to do this enough times, they
would catch on that if you are multiplying this
times this, and you know what that is, you know
what this is, that you could compute the product
here just by taking these two and adding them.
Of course, the way things would look would
look a lot more extensive than, you know,
much more primitive than what we usually
do with our Hindu-Arabic system, but still,
there's something kind of fundamental and
straightforward in principle about this story,
even though in practice it gets to be a little
bit onerous for us to write, especially if the
numbers are big. But the observant viewer will
notice that we haven't quite covered all the
bases with this multiplication rule that we've
given, because what happens when we multiply,
say, the empty M-set with a natural number? This
is also a natural number—it's what we're calling
zero. So what happens if we take 0 times,
say, this M-set? Okay, so the rule is, well,
we're supposed to consider all possible products
of the form unit times unit, where one of them
is obtained or taken from the first M-set and the
other one's obtained from the second M-set. Okay,
but in this case, there are no units in this first
thing, so there are no such products. We cannot
form any products—unit times unit—where they're
respectively from both of the ingredient M-sets.
We cannot, and so the product of these two
natural numbers will also be necessarily empty.
Another thing to observe is that associativity
of multiplication, which is a more subtle issue,
right? Why is 3 times 4 times 5 the same as
3 times 4 times 5? That essentially really
ultimately boils down to this associative law—the
fact that unit times unit times unit is the same
as unit times unit times unit. That's true because
this thing here is a unit, so this is just unit
times unit, so this left-hand side, it's just
about becoming a unit. And it's also true of
the right-hand side—that's a unit, and one times
or unit times unit is unit, so we're getting unit
on both sides, so they're equal, right? So this
fundamental associativity at the level of the
units themselves then goes up to associativity
of multiplication of natural numbers.
So if we wanted to multiply, say, what we
would call 2 times 4 times 3 in this order,
we get the same as 2 times 4 times 3, because all
of the various products, say, that are involved on
the left-hand side look like what? So the entries
of this thing here are things of the form a unit
here times a unit here, okay? And then when we
multiply by this M-set, we're taking a unit here
times a unit here, multiplying that combination
with one of the units over here. But on this side,
what we're doing correspondingly is those same
units that we flagged—maybe we color them red or
something temporarily—over here, we would see them
again, but then they would correspond to a product
over here. So here, the red one times the red one
would appear on the right-hand side, and then we
multiply by the red one here. So basically, we're
using the same law here, just applying it to all
these possible triples of units obtained—unit
here times unit here times unit here.
So we've seen this kind of argument before in the
maxwell kind of situation. We've observed that if
we have an associative product at the pixel level,
that that then lifts to an associative product at
the maxwell level once we just define maximum
multiplication as the M-set extension of pixel
multiplication. It's exactly the same kind
of story, same kind of pattern. So really,
it's the single associativity at the level of
these units which is really responsible for the
associativity of natural number multiplication. So
there's an argument to be made here, and you know,
you could convince some primary school student, I
think, by going through this carefully with some
examples. But it would be just orders of magnitude
more complicated to try to convince someone of
the associativity of multiplication using the
20th-century set-theoretical formulation. Okay,
that's just orders of magnitude much
more complicated and convoluted,
right? So we are really cutting to the chase
here—I mean, I think we're really boiling things
down to pretty well the simplest thing that they
possibly could be with this M-set point of view.
I think it's valuable to say a little bit more
about the role of nothing in this story so far.
So we've used nothing to create this empty
M-set, which is then going to play the role
of zero—that's sort of in the traditional way,
very much like in the standard formulation of
things. But in addition, I think it's important
to recognize that there's now also a new role
for nothing, which is not just contained in
the empty set. So our basic multiplication,
for example, right? We stated it in terms of just
being between unit and unit—unit times unit equals
unit. But we saw that actually it's a little
bit more expansive, a little bit more precise,
to also say what happens to the nothing times
unit. So there's really these two aspects of
things: there's nothing and there's something.
And what we've already observed or defined is that
something times something equals something. The
story is really completed by this more elaborate
multiplication table, which includes also the
fact that nothing times nothing equals nothing.
So you can see that there's nothing and there's
nothing, and nothing times nothing equals nothing,
all right? And also that nothing times something,
represented by that entry there, is the same as
something times nothing, represented by
that entry there, which is nothing, okay?
So the true multiplication table, sorted at
the level below the natural numbers themselves,
arguably has these two objects or two
concepts involved. There's both the
nothing and the something—it's just that the
nothing we're agreeing, we're going to write
it as an empty page or as an empty piece of our
page, and so it ends up looking blank. Okay,
but it's a new kind of way of thinking
about nothing and the role of nothing,
that we're going to actually have something
blank. It's not going to be a symbol that
represents that blankness—the actual blankness
itself is going to be addressed; we're going to
acknowledge it to let it be what it wants to be.
It's just empty, and so we look and we see, "Oh,
there's emptiness there." It's not as if somebody
has forgotten to write something, right? It's
meant to be empty—it is empty. It's a new kind of
thinking that's going to be very valuable for us.
It's very oriented towards an M-set point of view.
When we're doing arithmetic with M-sets, and we're
going to jack this up to doing algebra involving
M-sets as well, linear algebra, and so on,
we're going to see more and more the usefulness of
being able to think about nothing as just being an
empty part of the page, not being represented
by a symbol—just letting it be nothing.
Okay, so we have the beginnings now of a new
kind of arithmetic, right? An arithmetic which
is multiset-oriented, which incorporates these
fundamental aspects of nothing and something,
and which really ends up being aligned very much
with a naive layperson's approach to what natural
numbers might be, at the most simplistic kind
of level. So I think there's going to be a lot
of theoretical implications of this, but there's
also educational aspects that I think are worth
touching upon. In particular, there is the
connection between these numbers that we're
invoking here and the names for the numbers. So we
need to have a discussion about the importance of
naming numbers, which also touches base with the
issue of ordering numbers. So those two issues are
closely related—ordering and naming—and they're
both things that impact very directly on young
people's original understanding of arithmetic,
how they think about what arithmetic with natural
numbers is. So I hope you'll join me for that.
I'm Norman Wildberger—thanks for listening.